---
layout: post
title: Dynamics of the Coupled Human-Natural System
excerpt: "Ecohydrology Final Project"
modified: 1/21/2020
tags: [ecohydrology, modeling, dynamical analysis]
comments: true
category: blog
---

Human societies attempt to alter environment cycles to improve both ecosystem productivity and quality. Many complexities involved in Coupled Human And Natural Systems (CHANS), and this project was just one exploration into a mathematical model proposed in [Poporato et al. (2015)](https://doi.org/10.1002/2015WR017289){:target="_blank"}.

This model is a two-dimensional nonlinear dynamical system. Dynamical systems are an excellent tools that can provide insight on the interactions between two quantities, and the feedbacks that occur between them. What I did for this project was offers an exploration into this pre-proposed mathematical models, and expand on the work to understand how different parameters relate to one another.

The model in the paper is given by the two nonlinear ODEs:

$$
\begin{align*}
\frac{\text{d}q}{\text{d}t} &= \eta_0 + k_{nat}q(A-A_{ag}) - k_{ag}A_{ag}-c\bigg(\frac{q}{q_0}\bigg)^{\alpha}
\frac{\text{d}A_ag}{\ext{d}t} &= (k_h q A_{ag} + A_0)\bigg(a-\frac{A_{ag}}{A}\bigg)
\end{align*}
$$

where $$q$$ and $$A_ag$$ are the two main variables in this system, representing ecosystem quality and agricultural land area, respectfully. All other variables are constants that can be changed depending on the ecosystem. $$q_0$$ is some reference ecosystem quality, $$A$$ is the total land area, which is the sum of $$A_{ag}$$ and $$A_{nat}$$, the natural land area. $$A_0$$ is the rate of external market influence and $$\eta_0$$ are external inputs from surroundings. Finally, there are control parameters that also differ based on the ecosystem and how much human influence there is. $$k_{nat}$$ is a conversion from quality to ecosystem services, $$k_{ag}$$ is the degradation rate from nearby agricultural practices, and $$k_h$$ is the development rate of agricultural land in response to production. Lastly, two other parameters are defined, $$c$$ is the rate of turnover and $$\alpha$$ is some equilibrium control value.
